Ovulation is the physiologic process defined by the release of an oocyte from the ovary into the [[Fallopian Tube]] where it has the potential to become fertilized by a sperm. At ovulation, a mature follicle ruptures in response to a surge of LH from the pituitary gland, releasing a mature oocyte. The LH surge is the trigger that sets in motion and coordinates both the final stages of oocyte maturation and follicular rupture. No one single event causes ovulation. This occurs approximately on day 14 in a 28-day cycle. When ovulation occurs, there is a drop in estrogen. Typically, ovulation takes place approximately 36 hours after the LH surge (Welt, 2023). The distal ends of the fallopian tubes become active near the time of ovulation and create currents that help carry the ovum into the uterus. The lifespan of the ovum is only about 24 hours; unless it meets a sperm on its journey within that time, it will die.

During ovulation, the cervix produces thin, clear, stretchy, slippery mucus that is designed to capture the sperm, nourish it, and help the sperm travel up through the cervix to meet the ovum for fertilization. Ovulation symptoms also include vaginal spotting, an increase in vaginal discharge, giving the person a “feeling of wetness,” increased libido leading to more desire to be intimate, a slight rise in basal body temperature, and lower abdominal cramping.

The one constant, whether a menstrual cycle is 28 days or 120 days, is that ovulation takes place at least 14 days before menstruation (Holesh et al., 2023). Research finds that ovulation occurs more often from the right ovary; oocytes from the right ovary have a better chance for pregnancy than those from the left ovary (Fukuda et al., 2022).

###### Itemized notes
- Release of an oocyte into the fallopian tube where fertilization is possible
- Mature follicle ruptures due to surge of [[Luteinizing Hormone|LH]] 